---
title: AN 255 – Messianic Judaism and Pride
author: Dustin
type: post
date: 2018-06-14T07:00:38+00:00
url: /an/255/
aliases:
  - /an/episode255/
  - /episode255/
categories:
  - Episodes

---
<div id="buzzsprout-player-10552854"></div><script src="https://www.buzzsprout.com/1983601/10552854-episode-255-messianic-judaism-and-pride.js?container_id=buzzsprout-player-10552854&player=small" type="text/javascript" charset="utf-8"></script>
  
This week we are joined by Mikey Pullman and talk about Messianic Judaism, why Pride is relevant, renewed gay hate, parents claiming Christianity was on trial, Norway&#8217;s new burqa ban, and more.

<!--more-->

**Dustin’ off the Degree** &#8211; Messianic Judaism

In the 19th century protestant groups in started targeting Jewish communities for evangelism. In 1821 the London Society for promoting Christianity among the Jews published the first Yiddish New Testament. These efforts spread from the UK to Ukraine, the US, and various other places. In the US they had the greatest success with converting Jewish immigrants and created communities that had their worship services on Saturday and mixed Jewish and Christian customs. As a result the gentile leaders of the groups were being accused of being Judaizers by other Christians.

This movement picked up steam starting in the 1920s and by the 1940s and 50s Southern Baptist missionaries operating in Israel used the term “messianics” instead of notsrim which translates to Christians from Nazarenes.

The modern movement started in the 1960s with young Jewish people converting to Christianity while still being committed to continuing to be culturally Jewish. In response to this increase in interest the Hebrew Christian Alliance of America changed its name to the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America and the group Jews of Jesus started.

Like you’ll find in most religious groups, it’s difficult to nail down the beliefs because of congregation is a little bit different, but:

* Most are trinitarian.  
* All believe that Jesus is the messiah and even the ones who aren’t trinitarian believe that he was fathered by the Holy Spirit.  
* They believe that the Torah, the first five books of the Old Testament, is still in effect and not replaced by Christianity.  
* They believe that Israel is still God’s chosen people and generally do not think that switched to gentile Christians.  
* They consider the Tanakh, the Jewish scripture, same as the Christian Old Testament, but in a different order, as well as the New Testament to be scripture.  
* Some accept Jewish oral tradition and the Talmud.  
* They tend to have the same eschatology as evangelical Christians.  
* They keep the Jewish holidays and include the celebration of Jesus’s death and resurrection as part of Passover.  
* They follow Jewish dietary rules.

Most of the groups actively work to evangelize to Jews, often through handing out leaflets and doing one on one Bible studies.

In many congregations, especially outside of Israel, a majority of members are not people of Jewish descent. They are Christians that had to convert to both Judaism and Christianity at the same time to join.

Messianic Judaism is generally not considered to be Judaism by anyone, unless you need a token “non-Christian” for a National Day of Prayer event or you’re an Adventist middle school teacher trying to make the segment in Bible class about the Sanctuary more interesting by bringing in a “Jewish person”.

Many liberal Christians actively and often officially oppose Messianic Judaism as they believe that the Jews have their own covenant with God and Christians don’t need to mess with that. Evangelicals, on the other hand, love Messianic Judaism, because they’re the Evangelicals that put the Judeo in Judeo-Christian Values.

**NEWS**

**<a href="https://www.syracuse.com/us-news/index.ssf/2018/06/no_gays_allowed_tennessee_hardware_store_sign.html" target="_blank" rel="noopener">&#8216;No Gays Allowed&#8217;: Tennessee store owner puts sign back up after SCOTUS ruling</a>**

Jeff Amyx, a Baptist pastor and owner of Amyx Hardware & Roofing Supplies from eastern Tennessee was in the news three years ago for his &#8220;No Gays Allowed&#8221; sign he put up in his store. After getting quite the backlash he replaced it with a sign that read, &#8220;We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone who would violate our rights of freedom of speech & freedom of religion&#8221;. After the Masterpiece Cake ruling was announced last week, he took that sign down and put his &#8220;No Gays Allowed&#8221; sign back up.

**<a href="http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/christianity-custody-child-religious-debate-1.4693154" target="_blank" rel="noopener">&#8216;Christianity is not on trial&#8217;: baby custody case pits B.C. zealots against state</a>**

If you ever find yourself in a child custody case, it helps to have real lawyer, not Jesus, especially when the government thinks that you aren’t stable enough to take care of your child. AJ and DK had a baby, CJ at home on November 1, 2016 with the aid of a paramedic. They refused eye drops, the bilirubin test, hearing test, and vaccines and their baby was taken from them over concerns over the mother’s mental health and the father’s “potential for violence” as the CBC puts it. At one month the baby was back with the parents, but she was removed two weeks later because she was losing weight and parents refused to supplement breastfeeding with formula.

Since then a pastor has taken a restraining order against them and they’ve been arrested for disturbance at another church.

Then they got their day in court. The government made the case for permanent removal of their parental rights over mental health, violence, and medical care concerns. The parents countered that they were being persecuted for their deeply held Christian beliefs.” Of course at that hearing they refused legal counsel. They spoke in tongues at a stuffed lion which was giving them direct counsel from God. They also advised witnesses that their lawyer was Jesus.

They lost. They also lost their appeal with the BC Supreme Court.

**<a href="https://www.thelocal.no/20180606/norway-bans-burqa-and-niqab-in-schools" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Norway bans burqa and niqab in schools</a>**

Norway has now banned burqas and niqabs for students, teachers, and staff at schools and daycare centers.

Progress Party is the right wing anti-immigrant party that pushed for this.

Åshild Bruun-Gundersen, an MP with the party, had the following to say about it:

“This is very good news. When Progress in 2003 proposed a total ban on the niqab and burqa, we were laughed at. We see now that we have succeeded in bringing the political environment around to our viewpoint. In a few years’ time, we believe that Norwegian politicians will be ready to pass a total ban on the niqab in public.”

****Patron &#8211;** <a href="https://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2018/06/05/high-court-backs-nhs-decision-stop-funding-homeopathy/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">High Court backs NHS decision to stop funding homeopathy</a>**

**<a href="http://www.patheos.com/blogs/friendlyatheist/2018/06/08/forget-the-bible-ga-county-commissioner-takes-oath-on-malcolm-xs-autobiography/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Forget the Bible; GA County Commissioner Takes Oath on Malcolm X’s Autobiography</a>**

****Patron &#8211;** <a href="https://m.news24.com/Africa/News/egypt-authorities-arrest-atheist-blogger-20180506" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Egypt authorities arrest atheist blogger</a>**

**<a href="https://www.lgbtqnation.com/2018/06/republican-filmed-harassing-trans-woman-lost-election-lot/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">A Republican who filmed herself harassing a trans woman lost her election. By a lot. / LGBTQ Nation</a>**

Feedback

* @JohnnyLaird on Twitter  
* Randy via Facebook re 253  
* Adam via Facebook re 253

Discussion &#8211; Pride in the Age of Trump

**This episode is brought to you by:**

* Mike M  
* Danielle M  
* Darryl G  
* Arthur K  
* Rachel B  
* Jimmy Ninetoes  
* Al from Cestus Three  
* Kim B  
* SoJo  
* Alexandra T  
* John A  
* Rob C  
* Henry K  
* Alan M  
* The Flying Skeptic  
* George G

<hr width="500" />

You can find us online at <a href="https://www.htotw.com/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">www.htotw.com</a>, follow us on Twitter <a href="https://htotw.com/twitter" target="_blank" rel="noopener">@AtheistNomads</a>, <a href="https://htotw.com/facebook" target="_blank" rel="noopener">like us on Facebook</a>, use the [contact form](https://htotw.com/contact), and leave us a voice mail message at +1 (208) 996-8667.

Theme music is provided by Sturdy Fred.